---

layout: post
title: "GSoC 2016 Week 2, 3"
author: "Gaurav Dhingra"
excerpt: "Google Summer of Code 2016 Week 2, 3"
keywords: gsoc, sympy, 2016

---


Here is a brief summary of what we did in the second and third week of GSoC.

First of all I got late in blogging about our progress for the weeks 2, 3. Since the internet connection was disrupted([reason](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jat_reservation_agitation)) for almost 3 weeks in my city, so in between I had to move out to some other place. But still project progress is good :)

Status update:
<ul>
<li><a href="https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/11140">PR #11140</a> on implementation of strategies of coset enumeration has been <i>merged</i>.</li>
</ul>
</p>

We implemented the <i>Coset Enumeration</i> strategies. Suppose $G$ is defined by a finite presentation, and $H$ is a subgroup of $G$ (for $H$ we currently only list of generators which generate $H$), which is specified by words in the generators of $G$ that generate $H$. The procedure is known as coset enumeration and is one of the most fundamental methods in CGT. No algorithm (its been proved mathematically [4]) can be guaranteed to terminate for <i>coset enumeration</i>, so it can't be defined to have a fixed complexity.

<i>Coset Table</i> is equivalent to the permutation representation of the input group $G$ in its action by right multiplication on the right cosets of $H$. Beginning with the `Coset Table`, we have initialised it with various attributes in <i>SymPy</i>, most of them are instances of <code>list</code>, they are appended on the way while strategies like <i>HLT</i>, <i>Felsch</i> run over it. Contrary to what I mentioned in my last post, <code>CosetTable</code> is not a subclass of <code>list</code>.


The algorithm we have implemented is known as <i>[Todd Coxeter algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Todd%E2%80%93Coxeter_algorithm">Todd-Coxeter algorithm)</i>. The algorithm can use too much memory and time, but still memory is more important resource than time in this algorithm. This algorithm has got two major implementations:


> ### HLT strategy
In this strategy whenever we use the `C.scan_and_fill($\alpha$, $w$)` for scanning the word $w$ over coset $\alpha$, routine for scanning which if the scan is incomplete makes a new definition of coset using `define` then we make new definitions to enable the scan to complete; that is, we fill in the gaps in the scan of the relator or subgroup generator. Kalevi suggested to make some modification from the original pseudo-code, which resulted in quite a few improvements, since the changes removes un-necessary scanning.


For calculating the index of $$x^{-1}$$, for a generator $$x$$, we initialised the Coset Table with a dictionary `A_dict_inv`, which has `(gen,index)` as `(key,value)` pair.

```
>>> for x, index in self.A_dict.items():
...     if index % 2 == 0:
...         self.A_dict_inv[x] = self.A_dict[x] + 1
...     else:
...         self.A_dict_inv[x] = self.A_dict[x] - 1
```

We changed the slicing of the Free Group elements, which now work this way.

```
>>> w = x**2*y**6
>>> w[1]
x
>>> w[3]
y
```

Since earlier it was only possible using the `.subword(i, i+1)` to obtain the $$i{th}$$ "word".

We have now completed the [PR #11140](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/11140). We used the utf-8 encoding in `sympy/combinatorics/fp_groups.py` in its comments, which was generating the error in `Python2.7` but not in `Python3.4`.

```
SyntaxError: Non-ASCII character '\xce' in file /home/gaurav/Public/sympy/sympy/combinatorics/fp_groups.py
on line 79, but no encoding declared; see http://www.python.org/peps/pep-0263.html for deta
```

and then using the line `# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-` at the top of file resolved the issue, so seems like `Python2.x` is more sensitive to such issues.

There was one error in the implemted code:
```
>>> from sympy.combinatorics.free_group import free_group
>>> from sympy.combinatorics.fp_groups import FpGroup, coset_enumeration_r, CosetTable
>>> F, x, y = free_group("x, y")
>>> f = FpGroup(F, [x**2, y**3, (x*y)**3])
>>> Y = [x*y]
>>> C = coset_enumeration_r(f, Y)
>>> C.table # this will return the table
```

As for refinement, I will paste another one.

```
# these are the steps that happen internally
>>> C = CosetTable(f, Y)
>>> C.scan_and_fill(0, x*y)
>>> C.scan_and_fill(0, x**2)
>>> C.scan_and_fill(0, y**3)
>>> C.scan_and_fill(0, (x*y)**3)
# till now coset table is fine.
# here the coset table returned is wrong.
```

In the implementation of `scan_and_fill` the implemened code differed from that in the book in one significant aspect. In the book, `scan_and_fill` looped until it filled the $\alpha$ row in the table. ("Made a new definition and continue with scan."). While the implemented code returned after one definition, the error occured since I tried removing the while loop (some testing purpose). Then we also added some "examples" from [2].


> ### Felsch strategy

In this we first find the first undefined coset $\alpha$, in this instead of seeing ahead by making use of `lookahead`, we make <b>deductions</b>, which are put in a `deduction_stack` (a `list` instance which behaves a <i>stack</i>), which contains the pair $(\alpha, x)$, whenever a new <b>definition</b> or a <b>deduction</b> is made, this reduces the number of un-necessary cosets made (loweing the memory use at the cost of time).
</p>

Though we have made use of `CosetTableDefaultMaxLimit = 409600` (similar to that in <i>GAP</i>), till now I haven't found a single example which would exhaust this much memory in our implementation, every one just seems to take too much of time.

Python utilities learned on the way:

<ul>
<li>At one point we had to make a list of generator and inverse of generators of a finitely presented groups i.e `A` for a `CosetTable`, I did a bit of searching a arrived at using the [chain.from_iterable](https://docs.python.org/2/library/itertools.html#itertools.chain.from_iterable)</a> from the `itertools` which works as follows:

```
>>> from itertools import chain
>>> list(chain.from_iterable((x**2, x**3) for x in range(4)))
[0, 0, 1, 1, 4, 8, 9, 27]
```

</li>
<li>
Use of `product` routine, since in `coset enumeration`, we often iterate over  $w \in Y$ and $x \in A$.
</li>
<li>
In `Python2.x` a `list` instance doesn't have a `copy` attribute, so `list()` function or <i>slicing</i> is used to make a shallow copy. [3]
</li>
</ul>


At the end of the post, here's one awesome small example of `coset enumeration` using the <i>HLT</i> strategy. Here is how the code works!! :)

```
In[1]: from sympy import *
In[2]: from sympy.combinatorics.free_group import free_group
In[3]: from sympy.combinatorics.fp_groups import FpGroup, CosetTable, coset_enumeration_r
In[4]: F, x, y = free_group("x, y")
In[5]: f = FpGroup(F, [x**2, y**3, (x*y)**4])
In[6]: C = coset_enumeration_r(f, [x])
In[7]: C.table
Out[7]:[[0, 0, 1, 2],
      [3, 3, 2, 0],
      [6, 6, 0, 1],
      [1, 1, 4, 10],
      [5, 5, 10, 3],
      [4, 4, 6, 7],
      [2, 2, 7, 5],
      [8, 8, 5, 6],
      [7, 7, 9, 12],
      [10, 10, 12, 8],
      [9, 9, 3, 4],
      [None, 10, 12, None],
      [12, 12, 8, 9],
      [None, 12, 8, 9],
      [7, None, None, 13]]
In[8]: C.compress()
In[9]: C.standardize()
In[10]: C.table
Out[10]: [[0, 0, 1, 2],
        [3, 3, 2, 0],
        [4, 4, 0, 1],
        [1, 1, 5, 6],
        [2, 2, 7, 8],
        [8, 8, 6, 3],
        [9, 9, 3, 5],
        [10, 10, 8, 4],
        [5, 5, 4, 7],
        [6, 6, 11, 10],
        [7, 7, 9, 11],
        [11, 11, 10, 9]]
```


My mentor, Kalevi, has been very much supportive, when I informed him about my possible abscence (due to internet unavailability), he even sent me a mail about the <i>things we could do next</i>, even if I am offline.
So here they are: Cosets in Permutation Groups, Finitely presented abelian groups.

> ### References

<ul> 
<li>1. Derek F. Holt, Bettina Eick, Bettina, Eamonn A. O'Brien, "Handbook of computational group theory", Discrete Mathematics and its Applications (Boca Raton). Chapman &amp; Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 2005. ISBN 1-5848-372-3 .</li>

<li>2. John J. Cannon, Lucien A. Dimino, George Havas and Jane M. Watson, Implementation and Analysis of the Todd-Coxeter Algorithm</li>

<li>3. https://mail.python.org/pipermail/tutor/2006-November/051189.html</li>
<li>4. http://www.gap-system.org/Manuals/doc/ref/chap47.html</li>

</ul>

</body>
</html>
