---

layout: post
title: "GSoC Week 12"
author: "Gaurav Dhingra"
excerpt: "Week 12"
keywords: gsoc, sympy, 2016

---


Hi all, here's a brief summary of the 12th week of my GSoC:

Last week I uploaded the [test-coverage files](https://gxyd.github.io/gsoc2016/covhtml/index.html) on my website, that revealed some interesting places where a few versions of `scan` routine in coset enumeration have un-tested `if-elif-else` case.

As we are now approaching the end of GSoC time period, we decided to do some testing with some of the examples from 1973cdhw paper [2]. Coset Enumeration got my attention again since:

There seemed to be one bug raising `TypeError` so opened issue [sympy/sympy/#11449](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/issues/11449), resulting from coset enumeration by the coset-table based method. From beginning it was clear that the issue was not in `compress()` method. It was quite difficult for me get onto the main source of problem. But then Kalevi had a closer look on the pseudo-code in Derek Holt and also in Sims Finitely Presented Groups.

I wrote docstrings for a few of methods and fixed the issue [#11449](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/issue/11449) in PR [#11460](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/11460).

The problem there in code is explained briefly below

**Previous code-snippet**

```
1    i = 0
2    while i < len(C.omega):
3        alpha = C.omega[i]
4        i += 1
5        for x in C.A:
6            if C.table[alpha][C.A_dict[x]] is None:
7                C.define_f(alpha, x)
8                C.process_deductions(R_c_list[C.A_dict[x]], R_c_list[C.A_dict_inv[x]])
```

**After code-snippet**

```
1     while alpha < len(C.table):
2         if C.p[alpha] == alpha:
3             for x in C.A:
4                 if C.p[alpha] != alpha:
5                     break
6                 if C.table[alpha][C.A_dict[x]] is None:
7                    C.define_c(alpha, x)
8                     C.process_deductions(R_c_list[C.A_dict[x]], R_c_list[C.A_dict_inv[x]])
```

Here $\alpha$ looks over in till $\lt$ `C.table`. This way all elements of $C.\Omega$ are tested even in case that the set becomes very small. The inner for $x$ loop should also tests $p[i]$ at each round and break if that becomes different from $i$.

The changes that have been addressed in [PR #11460](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/11460) also include chaging the file name `free_group.py` to `free_groups.py`, similar to what we have.

It seems that Presentation of Permutation Groups won't happen during GSoC since there's just one more week; instead, I plan to focus on improving and completing the current PR's [#11361](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/11361) on Modified Todd-Coxeter algorithm and [PR #11460](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/11460) on addition of docstrings and better user methods.

One more thing, that I would start in this week though may not be completed this week will be the sphinx documentation of finitely presented groups. I found the documentation of Poly's module by Kalevi very much readable and interesting, may be I can seek to follow that.

> ## References

1. Derek F. Holt, Bettina Eick, Bettina, Eamonn A. O'Brien, "Handbook of computational group theory", Discrete Mathematics and its Applications (Boca Raton). Chapman &amp; Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 2005. ISBN 1-5848-372-3 .

2. [John J. Cannon; Lucien A. Dimino; George Havas; Jane M. Watson, "Implementation and Analysis of the Todd-Coxeter Algorithm" , Mathematics of Computation, Vol. 27, No. 123. (Jul., 1973), pp. 463-490](http://staff.itee.uq.edu.au/havas/1973cdhw.pdf).
