---

layout: post
title: "GSoC Week 7"
author: "Gaurav Dhingra"
excerpt: "Google Summer of Code 2016 with SymPy"
keywords: gsoc, sympy, 2016

---


Hi everyone.

Here's what we have been doing for *7th* week of *GSoC*.

Kalevi mentioned about the $LaTex$ not getting rendered on Planet Sympy website, thought it works fine on my website. Following the conversation Aaron opened issue [planet-sympy/issues/45](https://github.com/sympy/planet-sympy/issues/45), though it hasn't been fixed.

This week we completed PR [#11295](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/11295) on Reidemeister Schreier algorithm. Remember the [blog issue](https://gitter.im/sympy/GroupTheory?at=5776b220cdab7a1f4fbebd34) I asked on our gitter channel. Kalevi suggested to be more on the 'descriptive' side.


> ## What do we do this week?

Implemented the Reidemeister Schreier algorithm (shortly RS algorithm) and Titze Transformations (shortly TT) in PR #11295 . Most of the pseudo code for RS algorithm is there in the Handbook [1], perhaps majority of the time was spent working with TT. There isn't any pseudo code available for making that work, but we gathered detailed information from [1] combined with Havas Paper [2].

What issues were there?
In the both [1] and [2], there a few assumptions made, like

> shall assume that all relators are always cyclically reduced; that is, that
whenever a relator is changed, it is immediately replaced by its cyclic reduction.


I opened the issue [#11352](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/issues/11352) regarding a typo I left in `coset_enumeration_c`. Though I didn't expect a PR, @kritkaran94 fixed it. Perhaps a good test case which makes use of different value of `max_stack_size` was suggested by Kalevi. One thing came back to me, "everthing is an object in Python", the fact that initially `CosetTableDefaultMaxLimit` was a module level variable initially and we changed it to `CosetTable.CosetTableDefaultMaxLimit`, module is an object so is a `class`.

> ## What hasn't been done?

* No testing for a few of techniques, for example currently no tests exist for `elimination_technique_2`, which is a variant of the elimination procedures.

* TT doesn't produce the best possible result.

Though doing this seemed easy at first. But I didn't wanted to apply `identity_cyclic_reduction` every change as there can be a few instance where it not necessary to do this, perhaps because of the property of *words*.

The good thing about this week was that I could now understand the limitations that will remain after my GSoC project. The scope of Computational Group Theory is more than what I expected. Apart from that I will be leaving for my college this week stars from *15th* of *July*, perhaps I don't know how things will shift regarding time for GSoC. Let's be realistic :)

अलविदा


> ## References

1. Derek F. Holt, Bettina Eick, Bettina, Eamonn A. O'Brien, "Handbook of computational group theory", Discrete Mathematics and its Applications (Boca Raton). Chapman &amp; Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 2005. ISBN 1-5848-372-3 .</li>

2. [George Havas, "Reidemeister-Schreier program"](http://staff.itee.uq.edu.au/havas/1974h.pdf).
