---

layout: post
title: "GSoC 2017: Week 4"
author: "Gaurav Dhingra"
excerpt: "Google Summer of Code 2017 Week 4"
keywords: gsoc, sympy, 2017, integration

---


This week we completed <b><a href="https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/12850" color='purple'>PR #12850]()</a></b> on adding/removing variable in `DifferentialExtension` class for later introduction of creating extensions of $$\tan$$, $$\atan$$, and probably algebraic extensions as well. Lists like `E_K`, `L_K` and the new ones have been combined in a single list one, and the variables to record that information are `exts` and `extargs`. `exts` will store `str` instances having value in {'exp', 'log', 'atan', 'tan', 'alg'}, so whenever we at each 'level' earlier we discovered the extension to be exponential we appended `level - 1` to the list `E_K` (i.e. index) or to `L_K` when the extension is `primitive` but now we will append to just a single list and i.e. to `exts` either `exp` or `log`/`atan` accordingly (Note: $$\atan$$ is also a `primitive` until now, the only 'primitive' has been 'log'). First argument of both of lists (`exts` and `extargs`) is currently kept as `None`(owing to keep the code clean).

While `extargs` as is clear from the name stores the argument of extension. Well, it seems odd what the meaing of `args` will be for the algebraic case, I am guessing a tuple (base, exp), but we needn't worry about that for now.


We also have an open pull request on some re-organising of `__init__` of `DifferentialExtension` [#12849](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/12849). It isn't blocking anything. I think that PR is done.


> ### Key points

What seems important to me is that I can list some of the discussion key points here, since I need to those issues to be solved in my mind, in particular I often go back and look at the archives of gitter discussion.

1. Aaron mention about the issue in `is_deriv_k` (also present in `is_log_deriv_k_t_radical`), which prevent integrals of the form $$\int {\exp(ax) \exp(bx)} dx$$, and it raises `NotImplementedError: Cannot work with non-rational coefficients in this case.`. Now this problem can be solved with the use of Risch structure Theorem (yes, with capital `R`, small `s` and capital `T`, it comes to my mind whenever I see the name in the text, IIRC last time summers I was corrected Kalevi regarding `Todd Coxeter`, may be someone else).

2. Using the paper on "Simplification of Real Elementary Functions" (already mentioned in last blog post).

> ### TODO
Now coming to what I am currently doing is reading the text for `parametric_log_deriv` (there isn't pseudo code of this). I think it would take me about 2 weeks to complete this task, by that time my next semester in university will start as well (on 15th July)

This time I am late for my blog post, damn!. Aaron had to mail me for the post, SymPy has a Code Generation workshop in the upcoming SciPy conference (probably 9th of this month), and also we are going to have a release of SymPy 1.1 coming out soon, I guess that is handling quite a bit.

Oh, I forgot to mention, I passed the first evaluation as well.
