---

layout: post
title: "Operating Systems - Day 1"
author: "Gaurav Dhingra"
excerpt: "Taking a peek at linux kernel"
keywords: linux, 2018

---


Looking at linux kernel

I am currently reading the book <i>Operating System Concepts</i> by <i>Galvin</i> and <i>Galge</i>.

What purpose does an operating system serve?

Actually an operating system is similar to the government, operating system doesn't
do anything useful for the user in its own right but rather creates an environment
in which a variety of programs, apps can be function properly by making use of the
hardware resources (CPU, main memory, I/O devices etc.) properly.

An operating system is a control program, i.e. it manages the execution of user
programs to prevent errors and improper use of the computer.

<b>Moore's law</b> (not important though): every 18 months the number of transistors
                                        on integrated circuit would double.

> ## Computer system operation

There are a number of device controllers connected through a common bus, each
device controller is in-charge of specific type of devices. For ex, for usb devices
we have usb-controllers, for audio devices we have audio controllers and so on.

https://unix.stackexchange.com/q/268340

> ## Subscribing to linux kernel mailing list

I subscribed to the main linux kernel mailing list, which is supposed to be a
list of people having major discussions about the kernel and posting bugs there.

I have been trying to figure out some easy to fix issue on linux kernel. Even
though I don't even have a good understanding of the basics of C language nor
of the operating system, but I want to make an attempt at getting my first patch
submitted to the kernel. I can see that there is https://bugzilla.kernel.org/
but from it getting to recently non-fixed easy to fix issues might not be easy
, probably I need something like an (regularly) updated wiki containing such
bugs listing.

That's it for now.
See ya!
